Extreme types,
these are types that accept anything or
almost anything, and types that
accept nothing or almost nothing.
And we call these, respectively,
top and bottom types.
So TypeScript has a wide range of things
that sort of fit into this extreme types
category.
And by the end of this chapter you should
understand like what these things are.
Some pragmatic use cases for where some of
these different things are best applied.
And in particular there's a really cool
pattern around the use of the Never type,
which is tops scripts bottom type.
This is called exhaustive conditionals,
and
it's one of my favorite things,
favorite patterns to use in TypeScript.
So we'll get a little bit into that.
So first,
I'm actually gonna pivot to my VS Code,
which you can follow on in
the website if you like.
The first thing we're gonna
talk about is the type any.
So we've been dealing with this already,
you see a lot of anys
particularly as you're starting
to use TypeScript, even more so
if you're converting a JavaScript code
base to TypeScript a lot of things start
out as these implicit any's, or typeScript
cannot infer a more specific type.
But any can accept anything, that's what
makes it a top type, can accept anything.
Any value you can create in JavaScript,
you can put in a variable of type any.
So here we can see I've got something
I'm initially assigning it a number,
then I'm putting a string in there,
then the window.document object,
then the function settimeout,
type scripts, happy to let me do this.
But I want you to think about this as
sort of type checking being disabled.
We just got done talking about this
at the end of the declaration merging
chapter where somebody asked,
I had this sort of empty object as any.
And I said, well, I'm putting the any
there so that TypeScript is not actually
caring at all about the specifics of
like comparing the types to things.
That's exactly what we're seeing here.
TypeScript has sort of backed off and
regular JavaScript rules apply,
which is, of course, a problem here.
Look at this almost sentence
that I'm able to write.
Obviously, none of these objects are here,
and TypeScript is not doing a thing
to stop us from calling these properties
on undefined, it's, it's not gonna work.
Now, it's a common misconception
that like anys are evil and
you should ban them from your code base.
Sometimes any is exactly the type
that is most appropriate for
a given situation, and
a great example of this is console.log.
Any value you can create in JavaScript
you can pass to console that log.
There's literally nothing that you can
pass to it that it will fail to serialize,
I believe that's true,
that's a pretty sweeping statement.
And you can see here
like it's typed as any,
there's not really a purpose to
message and optional params.
You all have use console.log,
you just pass it a bunch of stuff, but
the first argument isn't any, and then
you have a rest param of type any array.
So you pass it as many anys you want and
it will log, this is the actual
appropriate type to use, or I will say,
a top type is appropriate to use here.
There's another type that TypeScript
provides, and it's called unknown.
So, performing the same
tests that we did above,
we can see that we're allowed to assign
a wide range of things to unknown.
And this, in fact is what makes it another
top type, it's ready to accept any value.
But there is something
different about this.
We can't use an unknown
until we perform a little
bit of an investigation into what it is.
It can accept anything and
that makes it a top type,
but we have to narrow this value.
We have to use a type guard before we can
go and use it for just about anything.
And so you can see here, we're busted
Typescript's helping us avoid having
an improper assumption that like all
of this stuff is my unknown variable.
It's a number, it's 14.
It doesn't treat it as a number, but
it certainly is not willing to let us use
it until we apply some type guards here,
which is exactly what we're about to do.
And I've left some comments here,
going back to the analogy we started
in TypeScript fundamentals V4,
where we think about types as
representing a set of allowed values.
I've put the sets for
each branch of this condition,
or this conditional flow,
as comments along the way.
So, this code up here,
my unknown, it's an unknown,
that means it's still a top type, right?
And that's true above this first if
statement, and within the if statement.
But the code block following it, you can
see we've said type of my unknown is
equal to string, well, now it's a string.
So this is the same narrowing behavior
that we see with other kinds of values.
This is what you would
see with a union type,
where you're trying to handle one
possibility and then another possibility.
But this is how you use an unknown.
You can almost think of it as like,
you could do the same thing with any, but
the main thing is that it prevents you
from using the variable before you
narrow it down.
You can see we narrowed again,
here's the number, and
then here we've got an else part.
And we're back to my unknown, and
that's because like it could be so
many other things.
TypeScript has no way of representing
the set of all possible values,
except strings, except numbers,
there's no way to represent that,
at least in the publicly usable syntax.
It may be possible to do it in
the internals of the system, but
nothing that's part of
the language lets us do it.